This literal administrative
tug of war
began to reach a climax in the spring of 1980.
On more than one occasion,
Those of us who met with Doctor Miller.
Informally after normal working hours. Tried to.
Persuade him. To back away from a showdown fight.
All over this point.
And we particularly. tried to persuade, tried to
convince him of the reality that Dr Hubert would be
retiring in
a couple of years, and that if he played his
administrative cards carefully,
He would succeed Hubert as chancellor, and then he
could have the oversight that he desired.
I certainly remember on one occasion Dr. Miller's
agreeing with our point completely.
And he promised to. Quote back off. Quote.
Apparently he. Did not.
Cease his contention.
And the matter. Came. To a climax.
in late in June 1980. The
board came to meet
on the campus
just after
Joe and I, with our kids and a truckload of
belongings,
went on our way to the new task at the University of
Texas at El Paso.
That series of events for me had
begun back in the previous
winter.
Sometime late in 1979,
I received an inquiry regarding whether or not I
would be willing to be considered for the
presidency at North Texas State, which at that
time seemed like a very
nice step
forward for me.
It seemed rather quick that I was one of the
interviewees
and went before the Board of Regents
of what was then NTSU.
Their first question will always be memorable.
because one of the group asked how long I thought it
would take me if they selected me as their new chief
executive officer to gain admission for the North
Texas Eagles into the Southwest Conference.
My recollection is that I told them I did not think
God would live that long.
And with a frown, they asked why. And I tried to
explain my feeling, my opinion that neither SMU
nor TCU was at all willing to accept another
Metroplex area institution as their equal.
And that similarly,
the four public institutions, Texas public
institutions already in the SWC, Texas
A&M, Texas Tech, the University of Texas at
Austin, and Texas Tech,
Would not. See much advantage.
To elevating.
That green and white team.
To their status.
Before they. Announced their decision. Don
Walker, the chancellor of the University of Texas
system, called me to ask if I would be willing
to be interviewed for the presidency at the
University of Texas at El Paso.
I expressed my gratitude and feeling of being
flattered But told him that I thought it probably
was not. Appropriate. To allow my name to be.
Placed in the UTEP pot. Since I was a finalist at
North Texas.
His blunt response was. That the North Texas
search had been determined. Before they went
through the formalities. And that Frank Vandiver
My former dissertation advisor. At Rice. Would be
the new North Texas president. Dash a prediction.
Which turned out to be very accurate. Paragraph.
Thus Chancellor Walker. Call me a few days after
the North Texas.
Presidential search ended. and asked if I would be
considered, and I submitted all of the
appropriate materials and began to learn as much
as possible about the past of the North and the
institution that had begun early in the century as
the Texas School of Mines.
Joe and I were pleasantly surprised to be one of the
six campus interviewee couples.
Soon I realized that they had a very inclusive
goal in their finalists.
because the on-campus visitors included
an Hispanic,
a female, a black, a non-native-born
American, the vice president of academic affairs
at UT Arlington. and yours truly, an employee of
Texas A&M,
certainly a minority in a UT search.
Paragraph, a backward look at the campus process
led me to conclude that all of the Parties in that
effort did their task with skill and grace.
All of the candidates seemed all of the interview
groups seemed to be comparatively well informed
and honest in their efforts. And we began to feel
that El Paso would be far more pleasant as a place of
residence than we had originally thought.
The next step was to pair the six down to three,
a trio of names that would be submitted to the Board
of Regents for their review and final decision.
I learned that I had made that trio
immediately after a coordinating board meeting
in Austin
when Ernie Smurton, the Vice Chancellor of the UT
System for Academic Affairs,
who with his
always energetic and highly capable wife,
Joanne, had been a member of the young couples
class at the Presbyterian Church in Bryan back in
the early 60s when he was the director of the Texas
Water Resources Institute.
Another stop in this review
came when two of the Bonilla brothers,
Corpus Christi natives who were zealous leaders
of LULAC,
The League of United Latin American Citizens came
to College Station to try to encourage Dr. Miller
to give more emphasis at A&M to the recruitment and
retention of Hispanics,
especially in the student body.
Dr. Miller asked me to assist
these two visitors. And as their visit concluded
with lunch at the president's house,
Jarvis whispered in my ear to accompany them to
their car parked over near the Koch building.
As we made that walk of approximately four blocks.
Tony chatted with vigor all the way while his
brother, Ruben, R-E-U-B-E-N,
was silent and intensely observant.
As we reached their car and I opened the door for
them, Ruben suddenly quickly turned to me and
asked if I was going to be the new president at UTEP.
I responded that I suspected they would not select
me. He asked why, and I told him since I was an Anglo,
I assumed that they would pick Dr. Hernandez, a
native of New Mexico and the Dean of Engineering at
New Mexico State, whose wife was a professor of
English at UTEP.
He firmly disagreed
with me and said, Hernandez does not have a chance.
When I asked why, he
told me that he and his fellow Hispanics could
accept the fact that I, as an Anglo, was not fluent
in Spanish,
but that if my name was Hernandez
and I did not speak Spanish, that was truly put
truly unacceptable in quotation marks.
Thus,
the three names, the board interviewed three of
us.
As I recall, the interim president at Colorado
State,
the academic vice president at UT Arlington, and
myself.
Dr. Smurton called me to make arrangements for
that session, which was scheduled in Houston
at the
cancer center. The first word of the name I cannot
recall at this point.
Each of us would be interviewed by the board in
executive session after they had completed all of
their other business sometime about midday on
Friday.
Further advice was that I should not bring Joe to
the session
and that perhaps I should eat a sandwich before
coming because the session might run beyond the
noon hour.
When we arrived, each of the three interviewees
was placed in a different room so that we did not see
each other on that morning.
I happened to have the honor of being welcomed by
the man who had organized that splendid Cancer
Treatment Center back in 1942 and had a delightful
conversation with him about the progress of that
splendid agency.
I've always thought, paragraph, I've always
thought that I was the third in sequential order to
go before the board.
which was seated on either side of a comparatively
long table with the chairman at the other end so 10
of us at the table with the chancellor sitting
alongside the board chairman
as they proceeded around the table for the
interview which did not consume much more than a
half hour,
I realized at its conclusion that each regent
asked one question
and that their interrogatories not only were very
well selected and phrased, but that they touched
the truly vital, each of the truly vital areas that
a campus chief executive officer
should handle. Such topic is academic freedom,
institutional breadth and depth, public
relations and fundraising, student recruitment
and retention,
fundraising and development,
legislative matters and community relations,
legal realities,
and personal health and integrity.
One of the regents, the regent seated immediately
to my right,
son of one of the founders of the Humble Oil
Company, gave every indication of being totally
asleep through most of the
session.
Finally, as we
had circled the table, the chairman indicated,
asked for further questions, then thanked me and
told me that they would be in communication later
to let me know their decision. As I started to get
up, the sleepy gentleman shifted in his chair and
then directed me
as he said, Sit down boy. I want to ask you a
question.
Then continued.
Well, Texas blood is orange.
Aggie blood is maroon. Can you change the color of
your blood?
Period quote. Prince paragraph, having never
anticipated that truly meaningful and
penetrating question.
I paused and then offered as my response.
My feeling of gratitude and pride at having been
able to go to Austin College. as a comparatively
reserved, shy boy from a working class family, and
that I would always be grateful to that
institution for what it had meant to my life.
Then I continued by noting that I had been lucky
to be admitted to Rice back in the era when there was
no tuition fee
and that the blue and gray would always have a
special place in my heart.
Then in 1959,
with a pregnant wife and very little money in the
bank, A&M gave us a job and we had been grateful for
the 21 years of very meaningful experience there.
And I tried to add that I believed that we could
also, would also be very proud and grateful to add
the University of Texas at El Paso
to the institutions that were dear to our hearts.
Luckily, Governor Dolph Briscoe's personal
physician,
who was sitting across from this questioner at the
Regent's table, smiled as he said, let me help this
young man a moment. And he told his colleagues that
When he delivered the first child for a young
couple
and placed the new baby in the parents' arms, they
indicated they would never love anything else in
their life as much as that child, dash, dash, dash,
until he delivered their second child and placed
it in their arms.
At that point, I quickly rose and said, I rest my
case and thank you for your courtesy.
As I, paragraph, as I walked away, Dr. Smurden
asked me where the board could, where I could be
reached by telephone. And I told him that I was
heading back to the Post Oak Mall, to the Galleria,
where I had left Jo. And she was simply going to kill
time until I returned.
Since there was an indefinite
Nature to the Regents meeting. We had agreed that
after 1 30 she would check. Every half hour.
At the bookstore there. At Walton. At Walden
Bookshop. And that whenever I got there, I would
go. There and wait for her.
And so he indicated that they would simply, when
they, when the board reached his decision, they
would call Walden Bookshop hoping to find me
there.
Thus, I drove back from the medical center to the
Galleria at the corner of Westheimer and Post Oak
Road. and headed for the bookstore.
When I walked in the front door of that
establishment, I asked for the location of their
telephone. The clerk, thinking I was asking for a
public telephone, quickly responded that they
did not have a phone. In shock, I worried about the
fact that I would never might never know what the
board had decided.
But then she clarified the matter. By telling me.
That their in house phone. Was near the back of the
store.
As I walked back. To that point.
Looking for the phone, I happen to notice a pair of
legs
that seemed very recognizable
extending beyond the counter.
And as I rounded the corner, Jo was there on the
floor
with the phone in her hands and a bright smile on her
face.
And as she looked up at me while talking on the
phone, she signaled with her lips, we won.
Quickly, she then told me that she was talking to
Ernie Smurton, who had called there
to inform us that I had been selected for the UTEP
task.
Thus, on February 29, 1980, leap year day,
we
hurried back from Houston to
Lawyer Street, to 1901 Lawyer.
thinking about a momentous
relocation
of family, energy,
and heartfelt devotion.
On the paragraph on the way back, we briefly
discussed selling the house that we had built with
such care and devotion 10 years earlier.